So first things if you can tell us your name, where and when you were born.
My name is Mahpul Akhter, I am from Pakistan, just straight from Faisalabad.
When were you born? 1952.
Do you remember the area you grew up in?
I was born in the district of Attaqsing.
How was your childhood?
It was very good.
You used to play on your own?
Yes.
How many memories did you have?
I have some memories.
She used to play outside, it was very safe.
She had small friends.
She went to school.
She made friends during school.
My friends were from the village.
All the friends were from the village but they were all very nice.
What was the household like?
We lived in a house.
We were four sisters.
We lived together.
We used to play together.
We were four sisters, two brothers, mom and dad.
They had a lovely childhood, very playful, very happy.
My father came here first.
Then my mother took me to look after the children.
So your mother was left there to look after the children?
Yes, she took care of us and sent us to school.
She taught us all the things we didn't know.
Dad came here in 1959.
They were all left with mother to care for.
Our mom sent them to school.
Also the Islamic education.
Mother had a lot of responsibility as they were growing up because dad was here.
What type of activities did you do?
We played hide and seek.
We used to play marbles.
We used to play tippo.
I don't know what it's called.
You know when you draw the square and then with the little thing you throw it.
I can't remember what it's called actually.
I don't know if it's hip hop or music.
It is kind of.
That's probably familiar to me as well.
What did you say, marbles?
We used to make marbles.
They were not marbles.
We had the five handmade stones.
We had to pick them up nicely without putting them into five.
We had to put them in one hand and if we don't then we are out.
We used to play with the trees.
We used to put them in our beds.
There was another game I just reminded her of.
In the villages they had big trees.
We used to climb on the trees.
She said they would climb on the trees and then they would get on the roof of their house.
Then they could walk over the roof of other people which was quite fun.
When you are trying to climb on the tree, there may be three or four people and one person will catch you.
Whoever they catch they will be the one.
It was quite fun.
It was nice.
Yes, it was.
I used to play in my school.
She loved sports.
She used to play sports.
I used to go out to play.
I used to play netball.
She used to go out of the city to play football.
To present her team.
Not football, netball.
Sorry, netball.
What cities did you travel and how old were you going to different places?
When you went to different cities, where did you go to play?
We went to Toba Tek Singh for the first time.
Then we went to Kamali.
Toba Tek Singh is a city now.
Kamali is another place.
They were playing with different teams.
Different schools.
So she was a teacher.
Yes, she was a teacher.
My mother thought I was staying there.
She was angry with me.
She said I can't go to college.
She said all the students who took part in sports, they stayed there.
When she got home, mom was a bit cross.
She said I couldn't travel back.
It's not like from Kamali to Toba.
It's a bit of distance.
She said I couldn't travel on my own.
The teachers were there.
I was very disappointed.
We didn't have the technology to let the players come.
Dad was here.
Mom was the sole responsible of the girls and the two boys as well.
It was quite a bit of hearts.
Like my grandmother actually.
My younger sister was also there.
She was not mine.
She was worried that she might not be able to travel.
Younger sister went with her.
She was the younger one in case she knew.
What was your favourite?
Have you got a favourite memory?
I had a childhood.
I had a school.
School, yes.
I missed my school.
I had friends at school.
And friends, yes.
Even if it's school, is there something that stands out?
Is it an event or a time or a celebration that stands out?
I used to watch sports in school.
There used to be a fancy dress show.
I don't remember if there was an event where people gathered in school.
There were also clothes dramas.
Dramas, obviously.
She used to take part in dramas.
Like school dramas.
I was a bit scared.
She played the postman role once in one of the dramas.
So, after growing up, is there certain traditions that you would always celebrate as a family or in your community as well?
When I was growing up, there were celebrations that we would celebrate as a family.
We would go to the parties that people would celebrate.
Yes, we would go to weddings and weddings.
We would all be at home.
We would go to the weddings and weddings.
She said there was a wedding.
She remembered.
They used to do the fireworks at the wedding.
Any wedding happens, children.
You don't know about it?
I don't know.
I lost my husband when I was married.
I'll tell you one thing.
She said, a wedding is a very exciting time for children.
The reason is because they were throwing the money when the bridegroom would come.
And she said, even in her own wedding, she went out to pick that money.
And I used to be told by my grandfather and my aunties, don't you dare, but we will escape.
So that was the best time of childhood.
It's not about the money.
It's just fun.
Whoever can collect more money because they used to do coin at that time.
At the end, she said, with other people, obviously other friends, they'll see who collected the more money.
But surely when they go home, parents are not very happy.
And obviously the other thing she said, you know, Eid.
She said, it's a special Islamic event.
My aunt got angry and said, why did you go?
Yeah, especially on her own wedding when she sneaked out.
So her other sister told her.
She was young.
This is when women were getting married at the age of 14, 15.
You don't understand what's going on.
Are you allowed to go out and pick up those coins on your own wedding?
Because the bridegroom has come basically.
And sometimes they'll go to the mosque first.
And I think that's how the masjid is.
And then they'll come home.
So it was a little bit different than what we do here.
But very memorable time.
And then as you spoke about family and speaking about here, when, because it's your father, you said.
And he sort of gave me some advice.
Thank you.
So you said your father came here. Did he come to the UK first?
He came to your father's place.
And what made him decide to come to the UK?
He said, he came here to work.
She said people were called here to work.
People from all over the world were called here to work and help Britain.
So that's why her father came here.
And when did you come here then?
When did you come here?
I think it was 1970.
Were you married?
She did came in 1970 as far as she could remember.
She got married and came here.
That was going to be my next question.
So how old were you when you came to the UK?
And was it Wales that you came to first?
I was born here.
Did you get married in the year of the Flink?
Did you get married in Pakistan?
Yes, I was 19 years old when I came here.
I was 19 years old when I had my first child.
So you were born here.
Yes, I was young and I didn't live in Victoria.
She had the religious ceremony when she was 14 and 15.
But she was not given away because she was too young.
So she got married.
When I say got married, she came to the country to stay with her husband when she was 19.
And the first thing she was telling me, actually if you want to ask,
what was her experience like, travel and all that?
You said that you travelled a long journey.
Yes.
She mentioned it was very stressful.
She said because at that time people used to get flights from Karachi,
no flights from Islamabad or Lahore to UK.
So she had to go to Lahore, then to Karachi.
But somehow the plane diverted back to Lahore and then back to Karachi.
And she had some other female kind of issue on the way.
And then it was quite hard for her first time.
Do you speak English a little?
No, not that much. I don't know much.
You were on a flight from EIA?
Yes, I was on a flight from EIA to Pakistan.
I was sitting with my wife Hukka.
She said, very strange.
She said there were women who were older than her.
She came here young and got married.
But there were women like the pipe, Hukka we call it.
So even there were women actually, middle-aged women who were coming here
because their husbands were here so they even had their pipes with them actually in the plane.
Which was quite strange for her to see.
And she did came to Newport EIA.
Yes, I believe you.
I was in the plane two or three times.
She also mentioned that when the plane was diverted here and there,
she was telling me earlier now, she said because she was starving
and she was too frightened even to drink any water as well
because you've left your family behind.
And especially the journey wasn't very easy actually.
So she didn't want to drink any water during her journey or have anything to eat.
So it was quite difficult. Her journey was very difficult.
Which could be different as compared to any other people who came here.
What was the most important thing that she had to leave behind?
She said that the most important thing that she had to leave behind was
parents, brothers and sisters, family, loved ones.
She goes beautiful streets, roads, beautiful friends.
Have you still been able to visit as well?
You live in Pakistan, right?
Yes.
Yes, quite a few times.
And after your flight going back and forth, how did you feel when you actually arrived in India?
When the flight wasn't good, but when you came here, how was it in Pakistan?
When I came here, my brother took me to India.
When I came out of the hotel, I saw flowers in the garden.
I thought it was a garden.
There were four flowers. I really liked flowers.
And today we were in a place, there were old flowers.
We were in the middle of the road.
And I couldn't hear anything.
I saw mountains and mountains.
She said her brother went to pick her up from the airport.
As she got out and he was driving towards Wales, she could see beautiful flowers.
Mountains. She said she loved gardens, she loves flowers.
So she was quite amazed to see the environment basically full of flowers, big high mountains.
And what else do you remember about the first month or first weeks after you actually set in?
When you came here, it was a week or a month, I don't know how long it took.
When it snowed, how was it when you left for the first time?
Yes, I came in July.
And then the next winter came?
Yes, the first winter came.
I went out and went to the shop to buy some clothes.
There was a shop on the corner.
I had to buy some clothes from the English market.
I had to buy some shoes or a brand.
I went out and heard the sound of the car.
I ran inside.
I came inside and my father was also there.
We lived there, and we came there for our visit.
My brother was in charge of my father's house.
I ran outside and I was like, I can't believe I'm going out in this cold.
Apart from that, when you came, I'll just tell you this, what she's mentioned.
She said the one thing, she came in July, it was obviously summertime,
but in the first Christmas she had, she got out, it was snowing,
and she thought, is a wool probably coming down?
So she rushed inside saying, where is this wool coming from?
And then obviously she was told it's the snow.
It does look like it, very flaky and beautiful, and how it's coming from the sky.
And when you're very young and the first time you've seen snow.
She said she will go to the shop.
She also mentioned that she could say obviously sugar, what she needed,
and she could understand a bit of English, but she did get more independent,
basically going to the local shop.
She stayed with her dad and brother.
My sister-in-law, she's an English girl, and she helped me a lot.
When she came here, her brother was married to an English woman,
so she was living with them, obviously, because she was speaking probably English,
teaching her English, which was a great help to Makbool.
How did you settle down? How did you get along?
First I was staying at my father's house, so I was happy,
then my father's house was in the area, so I went to my sister's house.
She had her own room, so I spent a difficult time there.
So you were with your husband?
Yes, I was with my sister.
No, not much.
What she's saying is that when she lived with her dad, that was fine,
and for some reason she has to leave her dad's house with her husband,
and then she just moved with her sister, where she stayed for a little while,
rented a room from her sister, her husband.
So she had a bit of a difficult time settling there before.
She had to tell her sister to get her own house,
and she had to stay for a while.
Then she got her own house, which was much better.
Then obviously they stayed there.
She managed some, but it was difficult, you know, when they had their own family and all that.
Then they had their own house and moved to, she and her husband moved to their own house,
which was much better.
And what about work as well?
Were you working? Did you start working?
No, no, my husband didn't do anything.
No, her husband obviously took financial responsibility.
So she's just looking after the kids and all that.
Alongside the kids, did you have other friends, other community groups that you were connected with at that time?
She did say because the street where they moved to with her husband,
there were people obviously, Asian or English?
Yes, they were all reading letters.
They were a woman who had come from Pakistan, but they were not educated.
But then still she would just say hello to them.
And she was very happy to see her husband.
She was not educated, but then still she would just say hello to them.
But not so friendly, but there was no other group.
And she said she had a book which is like a dictionary basically, in English and Urdu actually.
So if she has to go out and buy something, so she'll open the dictionary
and she'll read it basically, what she needs.
So at least when she goes out, she can speak and she can ask whatever she needed.
Basically communicate.
And so what can you say that you miss most about your hometown or the country?
What have you missed the most?
Nothing much. Everything.
Everything.
Even your parents?
I wanted to see my parents.
And I wanted to buy them a pen and paper, but they missed it.
Because they were sick, they were very upset.
She said that both of the parents have passed away.
And then she said she's got a family there.
So she goes there and spends some time with them.
And she said the most painful thing is when we are here, if we lose a loved one,
so then we are that distance actually that we can't be there with them.
So that's the most painful.
But then the most thing they are missing probably, she's missing is the family.
What about the culture as well?
What do you still love about your culture and what are you still connected with?
And you are still doing it.
What is your culture?
What we brought from Pakistan, you are still doing it.
We are still doing it.
And we are all together.
Even my sister's parents are here.
And Anjit is here.
And we are all talking about the pain.
It's like celebration time, like Eid time.
And then we are getting together, talking about the past, sharing obviously the happy moment
and the sad moments with those who have come from abroad.
And you are sharing a lot of your time with the group.
Yes, I am happy to see that we are all together.
And we can forget our pain.
She said when we share things, like even coming to the group,
we all share our stories, what we miss, or if there is any sadness, any grief, any bereavement,
they get supported.
And we all get supported, basically help each other to understand that it is hard at the time.
Because many people have said to me that if we miss a wedding, it's okay.
Life goes on.
Because people are still there.
But when you lose your loved one, like when we come back, we are never sure when we go back,
who will be there and who won't be there, or would we be there to go back.
So that's the most kind of...
But people still go back to see whoever is there.
We are sad when we miss our wedding.
Yes, we are sad when we miss it.
But we have a community here, we have to support each other.
Obviously because they do share grief here in Newport.
Getting together, people from the community and the group obviously,
it's great for people to come and share their grief and happiness at the same time.
In addition to some of the things that you just shared,
are there other elements of the culture that you've made an effort to preserve?
Like the wedding, the way we live, the way our children go to school,
are there any elements that we have made an effort to preserve?
I think you have said everything that is in your culture.
She came here when she was very young, very much loved in Pakistan,
coming here, having the family, bringing up the children.
You know that time went so quickly, and by the time having health conditions,
and trying to preserve the culture,
I think that's the most important thing that we have to do.
And I think that's the most important thing that we have to do.
You know that time went so quickly, and by the time having health conditions,
and trying to bring those cultures here,
like as she said, festivals, getting married, and all that.
But she said sometimes it feels like I've left the best culture behind,
can't do everything here actually.
There is a big difference in society, and the way the children are treated.
We are still trying.
All the children are educated, all the doctors are here.
All of her children, she's done her duty, they are all kind of educated,
settled in employment, and she's got the granddaughters.
My grandson is from China, he's a good architect.
So she's very much happy about that actually, that her own children,
even her grandson is gone too, he's an architect, he did it, and he's working in Japan.
So it's nice to have seen the next generation working hard and having good jobs.
Is that where Age of Life has come as well,
and your involvement being part of Age of Life in support of that?
I've been here for a long time, I've been living with my sister,
and then when I got married, I got married, and then my sister got lazy.
So I'm very happy with the group.
She probably knocked on the door and said, look, you need to come.
Because people do go obviously for pre-med, which is a cultural thing,
and Islamic things to go if someone has passed away.
So she encouraged her to come to the group, and she said she finds it very helpful,
especially when you're going through that pre-med process.
It's very hard for women to speak about it, Islamic.
We do obviously do Islamic rituals to give us peace of mind,
because sometimes you need people around them,
and she found Age of Life very helpful, Jasmine and everybody else.
But then recently she hasn't been very well, so she's missed.
But she did her best, she does her best to come.
She did, I think, Black History, the month they were trying to,
she came actually when we had the Black History celebration here.
Both of our daughters brought her in, and she stayed here with us,
which was nice to see her actually, just glad to see her back.
Why do you say that that's important to have a group that can welcome you
and you can still go through those processes?
Because you feel that when you go to a group, it feels good to go there.
You feel all the pain, all the tension in the family, you feel it.
Any worries, any tension at home.
So when going to the group, you share other things, you respect,
you look after each other, but they look after you as well, actually very caring, kind.
So then you forget about, like for that time is her time.
She forgets about what's happening in the house actually,
and then just be with other people and sharing different experiences.
I think it comforts her, her heart is comfort.
It's different as well, being in the house most of the days and hours.
Especially after losing your partner is very difficult for women.
Men cope different ways, but women are slightly different in our culture.
Because women think everything is gone with the husband,
even though having the children, grandchildren,
still you feel that time you spent together, you could have shared those memories.
So this is where she was saying coming to the group actually helps us to share those memories,
which she may not share with the family because she doesn't want to upset anyone.
They started crying actually because they were very close to dad,
so she can't share that grief and those memories,
but she'll come to the group and she can talk.
Because we have actually a couple of our members that lost their husbands,
so I did found that the group has actually helped them to come out and comfort them.
We can't bring the people back, but it's nice to know there's a place people can go and share grief.
That's everything. Thank you very much for sharing.
I was just asking if there's anything else.
She said she can't think of anything else.
But definitely I think a lot of people are saying like childhood, my childhood,
my story would never end.
I was saying tell him to do it in half an hour, and I forgot to tell him mine was probably one and a half.
I said no, they will take just the most important things out of it.
But I think one of the things people...
I think childhood is the best time of your life.
Which is true because you don't have any worries,
and it was much more safe time in open environment.
When you are in a town or a village, it's beautiful.
People you can trust, they are not related.
They used to be very close, which has kind of changed.
If you go and eat whatever you want, you won't feel hungry.
You can turn up at any door basically, they will feed you, and nobody will tell you off.
It was a nice time.
I loved it a lot.
Love and care for each other.
I think it's because people have moved away from the villages actually.
Parents, grandparents passed away.
Their children grew up, they went out for jobs in cities.
So it's not like as it used to be, but still it's nice.
It's not like it used to be when we came back.
Our father used to come here with his elder brother.
He used to have a big tree.
All the women used to come there and sit.
They used to enjoy it.
The children used to say it's so beautiful.
They all would sit around.
Sometimes you can visualize it.
This was the childhood.
Everyone used to come here to play and their mothers used to talk to them.
Moms obviously would share their own skills and things, but the children can play with each other.
It was a very safe environment as well.
Very friendly, safe.
It's not like you are not related.
Anybody was welcome.
When we were the head of the village, nobody respected us.
When we used to go to the village, we would get food from the village.
We would eat whatever we wanted.
When we made chapatis in the Abhavan, that was quite close to our house.
So when people would come and they would run out of chapatis, someone would go there and bring more.
This was the tradition.
Anybody who comes, they are not going to leave the house without having the food.
Which is a little bit different now because families have extended.
Her health is not very good, but it was very much open air, fresh air, love and care.
That's a lot and the loved one being missed.
There was no one outside the house.
They used to sleep openly.
We had a gate and we had the wall, but the walls were not very high.
But still there was no fear that someone would be broken into or there would be something horrible.
People would keep their door open and they could still sleep within their boundary.
The open air, the beds, surely some people are still going and getting the metal pole or the wooden beautiful poles.
Traditional, traditional.
She also mentioned actually that when she was in school, she knew very strange how sometimes you connect.
She is my teacher.
She passed away.
She was in Northamptom.
She passed away and I was talking to her.
Where did you educate her?
She goes, Birbala Desert.
My aunt was teaching there.
She said, rather than study, she was quite pretty as well.
I said, I will look at her rather than study.
I told her recently that she passed away.
It's a very small world actually.
Sometimes you get to know people in the background.
When you ask them, even, well anyway, that's probably it.
If you finish that.
I was just going to say something.
You can finish that.
I'll just share something else.